Good morning, everybody.
Welcome to Understanding UIKit Rendering.
My name is Josh,
and I will be joined in a little
while by Mathieu and Andy,
who are going to do
some demos for you guys.
We're going to talk this morning about
rendering and compositing with UIKit.
So, throughout the course of the session,
we're going to be building this app.
Actually, we're going to look at
the way that it's built.
There's a few interesting things in this.
We've got rotated layers,
so the edges of these will need
to be anti-aliased so that they
don't end up looking really jagged.
We have shadows around all these photos.
There's nice drop shadows
to give them some depth,
and we've got this label in
the middle that has a number
of interesting things about it.
It has rounded corners,
there's shadows on the text,
there's a reflection there.
So there's a lot of interesting
visual effects that we've built here,
and this has all been done using
UIKit with a few bits of CA,
Core Animation, thrown in.
But I've done it in what may be the most
obvious way to generate these effects,
which might not necessarily
always be the best performing.
So we're going to take a look at how
we've done this and why I did it wrong,
and Mathieu and Andy will
show you how to do it right,
since they're less lazy than I am.
So the things that we're
going to cover today,
we'll start out by talking
about some of the foundations
of rendering with UIKit and how
that relates to Core Animation.
So we'll talk about UIView and CALayer,
how they fit together,
what their relationship is,
how you decide where
they show up on screen,
where their content comes from,
all the basics of rendering
with UIKit and Core Animation.
Once we know where things are positioned
and how we get content into it,
we're going to talk about
when things get rendered.
And for the purposes of
what we'll be discussing,
that is CA transaction and how
CA transactions determine when the
changes you make to your application
by setting properties on UIView end
up getting rendered to the screen.
And then we'll end by
looking at that sample app,
and we'll see four main
topics about that app:
clipping and masking, edge anti-aliasing,
group opacity, and shadows.
So if some of those aren't
necessarily clear right now
what exactly I mean by that,
probably group opacity.
Don't worry,
we've got explanations in here.
Hopefully good.
We'll see how that goes.
And we'll get it all explained.
So to start out,
let's talk about the relationship
between UIViews and CALayers.
So if you thought about this initially,
the first thing that you might try and
do when figuring out how UIView and
CALayer relate to each other is to think
that they're actually a class hierarchy
where UIView would subclass CALayer.
And I want to start out just
to be clear right off the bat,
that is not the case.
But let's look at why.
So if CALayer were the base class
and UIView inherited from that,
that would be fine.
There would be no problem there.
But then if we wanted a UIScrollView,
we would have to
subclass off that UIView.
So now CALayer is directly
in our class hierarchy as a
superclass of UIScrollView.
But what if we wanted to use
a different kind of layer,
for example, a CA-tiled layer?
There would be no way to get
that into our ScrollView because
the ScrollView is actually
inheriting from CALayer directly.
So this really wouldn't work because
we would be really limited in how we
could combine UIView and Core Animation.
So instead of that,
what we actually have is two
parallel class hierarchies.
UIView is a separate class
hierarchy and CALayer is its
own separate class hierarchy.
And every UIView has a CA layer.
So by default,
when you just create a UIView,
you get a UIView that
has a regular CA layer.
The same would be the case if
you created a UI scroll view.
By default, it would have a CA layer.
But if you wanted to make your UI scroll
view have a CA tiled layer instead,
you can change that, although...
I just realized, talking about this now,
that's not actually what you would do.
You would want to put that CA tiled layer
in a subview of your UI scroll view,
so only listen to parts of
what I'm saying right now,
not everything.
But you could do that if you wanted,
just don't.
So that's basically what
the relationship is.
So now let's talk about how you use
UIView and CALayer to actually determine
where content will show up on screen.
And to be able to really talk about this,
we should start out at the base
and talk about screen geometry
and what the geometry is of an
iPhone or iOS device screen.
So let's take iPhone 4, for example.
The top left is the origin,
starting at 00,
when you're holding it in portrait,
and X increases to the
right and Y increases down.
So the native size of iPhone 4,
iPhone 3GS, iPod Touch,
all of the smaller iOS
devices is exactly the same,
top left, origin,
and the size is 320 by 480.
Now that's true even for the iPhone 4,
which has a high resolution display.
Because UIKit always
talks in UIKit points.
Which are equivalent to one
pixel on the original iPhone.
So 320 by 480.
Now that's really easy and really
nice because you know it's going
to be consistent across every one
of the devices that you look at.
Now things get a little more
complicated if you start asking
CoreAnimation for screen geometry,
because CoreAnimation doesn't
actually deal in these UIKit points.
So if you were to ask CoreAnimation
what the size of the screen is,
it would actually report a larger size.
So we'll see that in just a moment.
But one important thing to note about
the screen geometry is that it does
not change when you rotate the device.
So if you use your UI view
controller to do auto rotation,
the screen geometry,
even when you're in landscape,
remains the same.
With 00 being top left in portrait,
X increasing up then and
Y increasing to the right.
So, yeah,
native orientation is always portrait,
even when you're in landscape.
And if you start looking
at Core Animation,
you might have to start dealing
with different display sizes
if you ask Core Animation to
convert to screen coordinates.
So really the best advice I can give
you about screen coordinates is just
always use UIKit when you convert
to and from screen coordinates,
and we'll make sure that you always
see a consistent view of the world
no matter what device you're on,
as opposed to when you
start using Core Animation,
you have to know the specifics of
the display size and know that you
either have 320x480 or 640x960,
depending on which iPhone you're on.
But of course,
this actually gets a little
bit more complicated when
we start looking at iPad.
Now from UIKit, still really easy.
Portrait orientation, top left is 00,
768x2024 is the size.
This is consistent no matter
what orientation the iPad is in.
That is always the orientation.
So you can see the screen
coordinates on iPad 1,
iPad 2, all the same.
Now Core Animation,
it's a little bit less obvious,
let's say.
That's the screen coordinate
system for an iPad,
actually an iPad 2,
if you ask Core Animation.
So bottom left is the origin.
It would actually be landscape native,
basically.
And on the original iPad,
it's actually the top
right is the origin,
with x increasing down and
y increasing to the left.
So you probably don't want to ask
Core Animation to convert to and from
screen coordinates on an iPad especially,
because the results you get,
while they'll be consistent,
they may not be exactly what you expect.
So if you stick with UIKit,
it's the same on all the devices.
Hold portrait orientation
and top left is 00.
All right,
so now that we know how to talk
about positioning things on screen,
we can start talking
about positioning views.
So let's create one
large UIView to start,
with its origin at the top left again,
since that's our native orientation,
and we'll fill the screen with it,
so its entire size is 768 by 1024.
Now, let's add some subview.
How do we talk about the position
and size of this subview in its
superview's coordinate space?
Because we always talk about views
in terms of coordinate spaces.
When we talk about
positioning and sizing them,
we're often discussing it in the
coordinate space of the superview.
Sometimes when you talk
about sizes of views,
you may talk about it in the
view's own coordinate system.
But most of the time,
the first thing you'll learn,
or the first thing that you'll deal with,
is the position and size of a view
in its superview's coordinate system.
And that's called,
in UIKit and Core Animation,
the frame of that view.
Now, the frame is a rect, again,
in the superview's coordinate system,
and it's the rectangle that
is the smallest rectangle
that fully encloses that view.
Now, when it's rectilinear like this,
you've got non-90 degree
angle rotations on anything.
That's really easy to understand.
The origin of your frame is the distance
from the top left of the superview,
and the size is the size of
that view in its superview.
So in this case,
we're about 100 points from the left,
200 points down,
and we're about 200 points
across and 200 points tall.
So our frame is then 100, 200, 200, 200.
Now, frame, and this is actually a
very important point here,
is not a stored property.
When you set the frame of a layer,
it doesn't actually get
saved as the frame anywhere.
Setting the frame actually changes
a couple of other properties.
And in fact,
there's even more properties that
are used to compute the frame,
although setting the frame will
only ever change the first two.
So let's look at those first
two that actually do get
changed when you call set frame.
So the first is the center.
Now center is a point in the
superview's coordinate system
that defines the location of
your view within its superview.
And because it's called center,
it defines the center of that view.
So in this case, our center is about 200,
300, well, not about, exactly,
because it's right in
the middle of that view,
and it's defining the
location in our superview.
So that defines the location,
but what defines the size?
Well, that's where bounds comes in.
And in fact, bounds is a rect.
It's a CG rect.
So it has both an origin and a size.
But for the purpose of computing frame,
the only thing that matters
is the size of the bounds.
So we'll look at that first and leave
bounds origin for a little later.
So the bounds size -- well, actually,
the bounds entirely is a rect in
the view's own coordinate space.
So I mentioned that we would
talk about two coordinate spaces,
super view coordinate space
and the view coordinate space.
The bounds is in the view's
own coordinate space.
So it defines the size of the view
in its own coordinate space before
taking into account transforms
that may be applied to the view.
Again, we'll see that in a second.
So in this case,
our bound size is 200 by 200 and
exactly matches the frame size because
we have no transform on this view.
There's a one-to-one mapping.
So we're going to do a
little bit of mapping.
So our bounds is 00, 200, 200.
And that translates into a frame of 100,
200, 200, 200.
Okay.
So now what happens if we
actually do apply a transform,
which we were just mentioning?
And in this case,
let's apply a 50% scale.
So now keep in mind,
we're not going to change the center and
we're not going to change the bounds.
But nevertheless,
when we apply a transform,
we will be changing the frame because
frame is not a stored property.
It's computed.
And the first two things it gets
computed from are bounds and
center and transform is the third.
So if we set a 50% scale, that will,
as you would expect,
shrink the size of our view and has
actually reduced our frame size.
So our frame is now -- that
was our original frame there
before we applied the transform.
Our frame now is 150, 250, 100, 100.
Now, in this example,
we actually scaled down
around the center of the view.
We sort of scaled right down
in place and remained centered.
That's not just for the slides and
it's not just sort of the view.
That's sort of a convenience.
That is actually what would happen
because when you apply a transform,
it will always be applied about
the center point of the view.
So we've scaled down 50%
around that center point.
And again, this changed our frame.
Now, that frame is pretty easy.
You could kind of visualize what
would happen and in your mind see,
yeah, okay, I've applied a 50% scale.
I probably halved the size of
the frame in each dimension.
So you could think about it and say,
yeah, I went from 200, 200 to 100, 100.
And you could guess that.
But what happens if
you applied a rotation?
And let's say we rotated 45 degrees
instead of some 90-degree angle.
and David Now this one's a little
bit more difficult to think about
and really keep in your mind.
Because the frame,
as I mentioned earlier,
is the smallest rectangle that
fully encloses that view in its
superview's coordinate system.
And because we're now rotated,
the smallest frame that encloses
that whole thing no longer has an
obvious relationship to the side.
I mean, it's still, I guess, obvious,
depending on how mathematically
inclined you are.
It's the diagonal across
the box in this case.
But it's no longer a one-to-one
mapping from bounds to frame size.
So our frame is now 59, 59, 282, 282.
The diagonal across that box is the size.
But our bounds hasn't changed.
It's still 00, 200, 200.
All right,
so let's just take a quick review of
the components that make up frame.
These are the things used
to compute the frame.
We talked about the
three that UIKit exposes.
There are actually a couple
others exposed by CALayer.
So we'll look at all of them,
see which coordinate space they're in,
and just make sure we all are on
the same page about what we're
talking about with all of them,
because it could be a
little bit confusing.
So first off, we have the bound size.
As we mentioned,
this determines the size of the layer.
Now, the bounds is a property
on both UIView and CALayer.
They're the exact same thing.
When you tell a view to set its bounds,
all the view does is tell
the layer to set its bounds.
So regardless of what you ask,
you'll get the same value back.
And this is in the coordinate
space of the view itself.
Next, we have center.
Center is the property on UIView.
If you were to ask for
the property on CALayer,
you would find that CALayer
does not have a center property.
In fact, it has a position property.
Those are the same thing.
When you set the center
property on the UIView,
it sets the position
property on the CALayer.
We'll see in just a second why
they're named something different,
but they are actually
the exact same thing.
And that's a CG point in the
superview's coordinate system.
Now, next, we have transform.
Transform is a property on UIView.
That property does exist on CALayer,
but is not the same.
So on CALayer,
it's actually affine transform.
Transform and affine
transform are the same thing.
They are a CG affine transform
that defines a rotation,
scale, skew, translation,
any kind of affine transform in
the superview's coordinate space.
Now, that's it for UIView,
but there are two more on CALayer.
So the first is transform.
This is a CA transform 3D.
So it actually,
instead of in two dimensions,
it allows you to translate your
view in three dimensions on the X,
Y, and Z axes.
You can do rotations, transforms, scales.
There's a whole variety
of different convenience
functions for dealing with them.
But they're just matrix multiplication,
basically.
So transform is just on CALayer,
not exposed through UIView.
And it's, again,
in the superlayer's coordinate system.
Now, the final property is a little
bit more difficult to explain,
but actually does get to the
difference between center and position.
And that is anchor point.
Now, again, this only exists on CALayer,
not exposed through UIView.
It's a point in the layer's own view.
It's a point in the layer's
own coordinate space,
except defined in unit coordinates,
not in layer coordinates,
that determines the point in the
view that will get anchored to the
superview at that view's position.
Now, if that doesn't make
a whole lot of sense,
that's because I'm not going
to get into it too much.
There's great documentation
online for core animation.
Most of the time when you're using UIKit,
you're probably not going
to be changing this.
So I wouldn't worry too much about it.
If you really start to think
you need to work with this,
or if you find code that's doing it,
go read the core animation
documentation to get a better
understanding of what it does exactly.
But it will change how the other
properties are interpreted a bit.
Yeah.
Well, not going to try and explain it
much more than that right now.
Okay.
So those are the five properties
that contribute to frame.
These are used to calculate the frame.
[Transcript missing]
This is going to help us understand what
happens when we change the bounds origin.
Thinking about it mathematically,
you can consider changing the bounds
origin as applying a translation
to this coordinate system.
If we set a positive value for both the
X and Y position on the bounds origin,
that would actually shift the
coordinate system within the
visible frame of that view.
Making it positive,
we then shift that coordinate
system up and to the left.
Put another way,
this changes the point that's
in the view's own coordinate
system that's visible at the
top left of the view's frame.
So now the thing that's visible at
the top left of the view's frame is
actually the point in our content
that's at the bounds origin point.
So if we said this was 100, 200,
the first thing you would see at
the top left of your view would
be the subview positioned at 100,
200.
So it's effectively a window into
your view's coordinate system.
The bounds defines which part of the
view's coordinate system is visible,
is visible in the view's
frame at any given time.
All right, so that was sort of the
mathematical explanation.
Maybe let's look at it a little
bit more practically in terms
of actually putting this into
practice on a UIView on a screen.
So again, let's add that subview.
Now,
those of you who have tried this before
have probably noticed that by default,
if you just add a subview to a UIView,
it will actually spill outside
of the size of that UIView.
This may have bitten you for
hit testing purposes if you
were doing touch handling.
So let's just turn on clips to
bounds on that UIView to make
it clearer what's happening.
That will actually make sure that
anything outside of the bounds of
the view does not get rendered.
So turning on clips to bounds will
mask out all the parts that are
outside of the frame of the view.
So now this is set up with our
default bounds with the origin of 00.
So if we then apply a positive
value to the bounds origin,
we're effectively shifting which
part of that view's content
is visible within its frame.
Again, we're not actually changing the
frame by changing the bounds origin,
so we're just shifting that part there up
and to the left to change the part of the
view's coordinate system that's visible.
All right, so now we know where views
are positioned on screen,
and we know how they're sized.
So how do we get content into them
now that we're positioning them?
Well,
there's really one fundamental thing
that is the underlying mechanism for
everything else that draws on iOS,
and that is setting a view's
layer's contents property.
[Transcript missing]
So, just a couple of examples of taking a
look at how your performance of your
app will vary based on whether you
use UIImageView or DrawRect for some
simple things that UIImageView supports
right out of the box.
So the first is,
let's say we've got this view here,
or sorry, this image,
and we want to stretch it out
into a larger 320 by 200 area.
Well,
we'd actually have to break that into
three slices to stretch it properly,
because we'd need to
stretch the left part,
the middle part,
and the right part independently.
Because we don't want that arrow in the
middle to get stretched out horizontally.
But if we wrote our own drawing
code and did it in DrawRect,
we could definitely do that.
We could use UIImage,
it has DrawRect and a
variety of methods like that,
that will let you draw this in
any way you like in your DrawRect.
And if you did that,
you'd actually find that
you ended up getting this.
So let's say we're going to use a 3GS,
and that is at a 320 by 200 view
going to be 250 additional kilobytes
of dynamic memory on an iPhone 3GS.
On an iPhone 4,
it's actually a megabyte of extra
memory that is being allocated and
filled with pixels just so that you can
stretch out this image that you already
had in a smaller form to begin with.
[Transcript missing]
All right, so now we've got content
positioned on screen,
we've got content into our view,
so how do we determine when that
content is going to appear on screen,
when will it actually get rendered?
And the specific reason that you might
be asking yourself this is because maybe
you're making two changes to a view.
You're changing its frame and then
you're changing its transform.
But you want to make sure that you
don't end up seeing something on screen
that only has half of those changes.
You want to be sure that they
both render at the same time.
Well, the good news is if you do nothing,
that's guaranteed to happen
as long as you do it in the
same turn of the run loop.
So let's take a look at what
will happen when we actually
call setFrame and setTransform.
Now, we're not actually having to
do anything with CA transaction
ourselves to make this happen,
because Core Animation and
UIKit will make sure that when
you set properties on your layers,
it handles creating and committing
CA transactions on your behalf.
So you've been doing this all
along and didn't even know it,
maybe.
So let's say we first start out
by calling setFrame on our view to
move that view from the top left
into the center of the screen.
Now,
Core Animation will create an implicit
transaction on your behalf the first
time that you set one of these layer
properties in one turn of the run loop.
So now that implicit transaction is open,
and any other changes we make
will be grouped up with that first
change and committed as a group.
So if we then call setTransform,
that will be scaling that,
let's say we're scaling that view down,
we haven't rendered anything yet.
We've got that dotted outline there
of where we will be rendering it,
but it hasn't appeared on screen.
So the setTransform is in that
same implicit transaction.
Now, let's say that we're done,
this is maybe in our
button action method,
and we return from that
UI button action method.
That's going to cause Core Animation to
commit this implicit transaction once
we go back to the turn of the run loop.
And that will actually cause
that content to render on screen.
Now, this may have bitten
some of you in the past,
actually,
if you didn't know it was happening.
Because let's say you have a
button action method and you
want to start a progress spinner.
So you create a UI progress indicator
and tell it to start animating the spin.
And then you go off and start a
while loop on your main thread
for the next five minutes.
First of all, don't do that, please.
But if you did,
you would find that your progress
spinner actually never started.
And that's because the starting
of that progress indicator was set
up in this implicit transaction.
You never went back to
the turn of the run loop.
So Core Animation never committed
that implicit transaction.
And it's sitting there waiting
for you to make the rest of your
changes before it draws anything.
So implicit transactions are definitely
your friend 99.9% of the time.
If you're doing the wrong thing
and blocking your main thread
for a long period of time,
we might be hurting you a little bit.
But the answer to that is
not fix CA transaction.
It's stop blocking the main thread,
please.
So there's also explicit transactions.
But I'm not going to talk
about that this morning.
Because when you're
creating UIKit applications,
there's really very little reason
to use an explicit transaction.
The main purpose of explicit
transactions in Core Animation is
to allow you to change properties
on the implicit animations that
Core Animation would create for you.
But if you're using UIKit,
we take care of that for you.
And there's UIKit APIs to
change animation durations,
animation curves, animation delays,
animation completion callbacks.
All of the things that you normally
would use an explicit transaction
for in a Core Animation only app,
there's alternatives available
in UIKit that are easier to use.
The reason I discourage you from
using the explicit transactions in
Core Animation is because they can
actually change that commit timing
depending on when you create it.
So you can actually create and
commit your explicit transactions.
I'm not going to get too much
into the details of that.
But just to make sure that you
understand what I'm saying,
If you're working with UIKit,
I would strongly encourage you to stick
just with the implicit transaction
and not create your own explicit ones.
All right,
so now let's get into the exciting
cool rendering technique stuff.
And we're going to look at it from
the perspective of performance because
this sample app that we have written,
well, it looks really cool,
but while you're scrolling,
especially on an original iPad,
it's incredibly choppy.
The performance is terrible.
So let's take a look at what we've got.
The most important thing that we're going
to cover while we talk about this app,
and the biggest thing that
is making it perform poorly,
is off-screen rendering.
And the best thing you can do,
and the most common thing that you
can do in your UIKit application
to find places that your rendering
performance is poor and improve them,
is to find places where you're
rendering off-screen and avoid that.
So what do I mean by
off-screen rendering?
Well, let's say we've got this view
hierarchy that we're trying to draw.
We've got four views.
That outer super view is gray.
We've got a subview of
that that is orange,
and two subviews of that
that are both green.
So before we talk about exactly
what the off-screen pass means,
let's just look at what happens
if there is no off-screen pass.
Now,
this all happens so fast that you would
never see these intermediate parts,
but we're breaking it down
one step at a time just for
the conceptual purposes here.
So Core Animation would first
render the deepest view.
Well, actually, the shallowest view,
I guess, depending on which way
you're looking at it.
It would render that
gray view in the back.
It would then be able to lay down the
pixels for that orange view on top of it.
It would then be able to lay
down the pixels for those two
green views on top of that.
Now, this would be the ideal.
No off-screen rendering.
Core Animation can just blit
each of those backing stores,
one after the other,
into the frame buffer
on top of each other.
Now, if we do something to that
orange view that causes it to
require off screen rendering,
and we'll see in just a couple minutes
a few of the things that that might be,
what will actually happen when
CoreAnimation has to render that
frame is that first it will be able
to again render that backing gray
view right to the frame buffer,
but then it's going to require an
off screen pass for this orange view.
And what that means is it can't render it
right on top of that gray backing store.
It has to tear down
its rendering context,
point the graphics processor to
a piece of off screen memory,
allocate that off screen memory,
and then start drawing there.
So it will first render that
orange view into this off screen
buffer that it just allocated.
Then it's going to render
those two sub views,
the entire subtree actually,
the green view and the other green view,
on top of it into this off screen buffer.
Once it's done rendering that,
it tears down that graphics context,
points the hardware
back to the main screen,
and then using what it
just rendered off screen,
it can draw that on top
of the main frame buffer.
So there's this whole extra overhead
of additional allocation of memory,
additional time spent pointing
the graphics processor
from one buffer to another.
It has to flush all the
pipelines for the graphics.
It's really expensive to do this switch
between on screen and off screen buffers.
So requiring that CoreAnimation do this
at every frame gets really expensive.
And if you have something that
requires off screen rendering,
that's going to happen once
every time the screen updates.
So if you're trying to drag
something in a scroll view.
Sometimes it's rendering a
frame while you're dragging.
It'll draw some views on screen,
draw some off,
then draw some back on again.
And it gets really expensive really fast.
So avoiding those off screen passes is
a great way to improve your performance.
Now there is one trick you can use
which can minimize this impact.
And that is called layer rasterization.
And the idea with layer rasterization
is that you give CoreAnimation a
hint that you both expect it to
render your view off screen and
that it's safe for it to cache that
off screen rendering across frames.
And reuse the same off screen
rendering for the next frame
that it used for the first frame.
So in that case, it would basically draw
that background view.
And assuming it had already
just drawn that frame we saw,
it would have kept around
that off screen rendering.
So it wouldn't have to do it again.
So those views on the left,
it doesn't even have
to render again at all.
Once it does that, it can just say, oh,
here, I have this buffer and
draw that right on screen.
So if you're rasterizing that layer
that required off screen rendering,
it's now much faster because
we don't have to switch
between the on and off screen.
Now, of course,
the catch with this is that
CoreAnimation will actually never do
incorrect rendering as a result of
you telling it to rasterize something.
So this means that if you were
doing something in that view,
say, animating those sub views around by
rotating them and sliding them down,
you would not be able to reuse that
cached off screen version for the
next frame because the next frame
looks different than the last frame.
So in that case,
it would actually have to throw away
that off screen rendering anyway,
and you would be back to just as
bad as you were to begin with.
And if you had told CoreAnimation
to rasterize something that didn't
require off screen rendering before,
you could actually be even worse
because you weren't going to
require off screen rendering.
You just told it to render off
screen by saying should rasterize,
but it can't reuse the off screen cache.
So now it's doing the off screen
and on screen at every frame again.
So we'll talk about a few
places that you can use should
rasterize to improve performance,
but the important thing that I really
want to just keep stressing here is,
you know, is should rasterize is not
some magic bullet that you can
just set on everything and say,
oh, should rasterize is the fast flag.
That's not what that means.
It's great and really useful and
can help in a lot of situations,
but be sure that you understand what
it's doing because it can also hurt
your performance in other situations.
All right, so let's look at our app.
The first thing I want to focus on
is this text label in the middle.
Now, there's a number of interesting
things going on in this,
but the first one that we're going
to look at is the clipping and
masking that we have happening.
Now, we've got those rounded
corners around the edges,
which look really nice,
but I've done it in the easiest
way that I could think of,
which is to set the cornerRadius
property on the underlying
CALayer behind the UIView.
CornerRadius just lets us define that
the corners of a layer should be rounded.
So it's really easy.
It's one property.
It's one value.
You just set the radius,
and it just happens.
But it's also quite slow because it can
require an off-screen rendering pass,
and it will in this case because this
view actually has a bunch of subviews.
The other thing that we have
masked here is that reflection,
and the reason that's masked is because
the way I've implemented this reflection
is by having two copies of that same
view hierarchy with the little rounded
pill-shaped thing with the text,
the one at the top that's rendered,
you know, full and clear,
and then there's another actually below
it flipped on its Y axis and masked
with a gradient to make it look like it
fades out and seem like a reflection.
But that gradient mask is really
expensive because it requires that the
entire view for that -- or the entire
view hierarchy for the bottom part
of that label be rendered off-screen,
then the final off-screen
image gets composited to the
frame buffer through a mask.
So it's really expensive,
and it happens at every frame.
So we've done this using the mask.
We've done this using the
masks to bounds property.
If you just set corner radius
or just set layer masks,
you would actually find that your
drawing would not change in most cases
because by default masks to bounds
-- I can't say masks -- is turned off.
Actually, it may be masks to bounds if
you're asking the CA layer,
but if you ask the UIView,
it's actually clips to bounds.
We like to change names just
to confuse you a little bit,
but they're actually
the exact same thing.
We've done that with Corner Radius,
and CALayer masks, and Clips to Bounds,
or Masks to Bounds.
This is a really convenient
way to get these appearances,
but they're pretty slow,
so we can do better.
What techniques can we use to fix this?
Well, there's a couple tricks
we can use to fake it.
First, we can use contents-rect.
Although actually we can't
in this particular example,
but in some cases we could.
Contents-rect defines which part of a
view's content actually gets rendered.
So if you have a large image,
say you were maybe using some
game development techniques
of having a very large image
that contains all your sprites,
you can pick one of them out
of it by using contents-rect to
define the part of your content
image that actually gets rendered.
So it's great and really helpful
if you're trying to clip out a
rectangular part of the content.
I'm not going to get too much into
that because it's actually not going
to help us in this particular example.
But if you have cases where you need to
clip out rectangular parts of content,
go check out the documentation
on contents-rect.
That may be able to help you out.
What we're actually going to
do is use DrawRect to improve
the performance of this.
The idea will be that we want
to actually render all those
expensive things up front to avoid
having to do them at every frame.
And the other option that you could use,
which we again won't do here,
is a transparent or opaque overlay,
drawing some additional content
on top of views to mask out parts
that you don't want to be visible
without requiring off-screen passes.
For this example,
we could maybe use black corners
around the edges that were rounded
pieces of content and drop them
over top of our view just to obscure
the parts and make it look rounded.
But of course,
in the actual app that we have,
we can see through
this to the background,
so that wouldn't really work for us.
The other issue that we
have is group opacity here.
Now, what do I mean by group opacity?
Well, let's use this UI slider in order
to really explain what it means.
And I'm going to set the alpha value on
these sliders to 50%. With the top one,
I will have group opacity enabled,
and with the bottom one,
I will have group opacity disabled.
So when I set alpha with group opacity,
it fades out exactly
like you'd expect to see,
and everything looks right.
If I set alpha without
group opacity enabled,
you see through the
knob to the track below.
And the reason for that is UIkit
actually cheats a little bit by default.
Because group opacity requires
an offscreen rendering pass,
we don't do it normally.
So if you set alpha on a
view that has sub views,
all we do is multiply that alpha
down through all the sub views
so they all render at 50% alpha,
which means that they actually end
up transparent with respect to their
super view even though they should
really be opaque like that top one.
So there's a couple ways we can fix this.
First we could re-enable group
opacity for all of UIkit.
That would be setting the UI view group
opacity key in your Info.plist to yes.
But this, of course,
turns back on that offscreen
pass and makes things slow again.
We could also pre-render our
view in draw rect and pay that
cost once up front rather than
having to do it at every frame.
The other option, if our content in the
view isn't changing,
is to actually turn on
that should rasterize bit.
This will cache offscreen our
entire view and make it much
faster to render at every frame.
Because it will just be copying
an image from that view.
that off screen cache.
So there's a couple
ways we could fix that.
The other thing that we have going
wrong in this label is these shadows.
And it's probably a little
bit difficult to see,
but there's a very subtle shadow
behind the text in this label.
It's pretty faint.
I've done that using the shadow
properties on the CA layer.
There's a shadow offset and shadow color.
And they're really convenient,
but they're also really expensive.
So we could do better than that with
a couple other techniques that Mathieu
is going to come up and show you.
So before we get started with the code,
I would like to show you some tools
we can use to identify those issues.
So the first thing you want
to do is launch Instruments.
And attach a Core Animation template
to your iPad or iPhone.
And you want to check the-- there it is.
There's the off-screen rendering.
That's going to put a wash on your views
where you actually draw off-screen.
So let's check that on.
There we go.
So you see all our
views mostly are yellow.
Turn it off.
So that's really the first thing you
should do when you have a problem
with performance and rendering issues,
is use Instrument and this template.
So as Josh mentioned,
we're going to try to use DrawWrite
to do most of what he was doing
before with Core Animation.
And I'm going to show you what we
were using in Core Animation and
what we use now in CG.
So the first thing we're going to take
care of is the rounded corner background.
So Josh used the radius corner,
but it's very expensive.
But really what it is,
it's a Bezier pass with
rounded corner that we render,
and we can draw directly as
a background of our view.
So the first thing we do here,
we have the background color.
We do the background color,
and a bit later we
have the radius corner,
and then we set setNiceToBounds.
So what we do is create a
UI Bezier pass with rounded corner.
We have those very nice convenience
methods to do that for you.
You don't have to build a Bezier pass.
And then we just choose the
same color and we fill it.
So that take care of the,
we can remove the corner radius here,
and we already win one off-screen pass.
So next thing we want to do,
I'm going to show you is to draw
the shadow and the text label.
So before, as Josh mentioned,
we were using the shadow color,
the shadow offset.
That's very expensive to draw,
because Core Animation needs
to render the,
needs to draw the shadow
while it's rendering the text.
So what we do,
It's like we set a shadow
with the same property here
that we were putting before.
The same offset, the same blur,
and the same color.
There's one thing, though,
that you should be careful
before you do that.
Core graphics draw as soon
as you ask it to draw.
Core animation,
you can set a property and it's
going to be rendered after the
transaction gets committed.
Here, as soon as you say draw, it draws.
So you need to set your shadow properties
before you start drawing anything,
in this case the text.
So you have the shadow property now,
and the shadow color.
You draw the text, and you have this,
pretty much the same effect.
So with that,
we're going to see that we already start
rendering some of our label on screen.
You see the top of the
label is perfectly rendered.
You still have the nice shadow,
you still have the rounded corners.
Maybe it's not very clear,
but we also have an alpha on our view,
so you can see a little
bit of the line in behind.
But we still have the reflection
that's still rendered off screen,
and we want to take care of that.
You're going to see in the
sample code that here we create
an image with a gradient on it.
We put that image on the layer,
and we set that layer as
a mask layer on our view.
And that's very expensive, too.
But really,
we could do it also in DrawRect.
So on the left side, on your left side,
you have what we used to do before.
So we create an image with the gradient.
We set that image on the layer,
and then we set that layer
as a mask layer on our view.
But really,
we can reuse a lot of the code we
are using to create the gradient
in our DrawRect method directly.
So here my view is reflected.
So we create the same image,
the same gradient.
You see the code is very similar.
We just like switch the -- the
only thing that really changes the
location because Core Animation and
CG have a different code in a space.
But we have the same code.
I mean, the complexity of doing
the gradient is the same.
So we create an image.
So you need a new context,
and you create this image.
And then for the same reason that
we were setting up the shadow
property before we draw the label,
you have to set that mask on the context
before you actually draw anything
because it gets worn as soon as you ask.
The only thing we did here in this all,
to try to optimize this,
was moving some code around in the
drawRack method because drawRack
is going to get called only once
before the animation and that's it.
And that's something also very important,
that's because your frame size
doesn't change during the animation.
If your frame was changing,
you would have to use some other
techniques to fix those issues here.
So let's see,
now we have... We moved most of the
drawing code out of the initializing
code to the drawRack method.
So now if I go back to my Frog app,
you can see that all the drawing
now is rendered on screen.
And it's pretty fast.
You want to avoid those yellow
wash on your UI as much as you can.
Sometimes it's not possible,
but in this case it's possible and your
animation is going to get faster or you
can do more things during your animation.
Hope it was useful.
Thank you very much.
[Transcript missing]
The problem is it's expensive,
because what Core Animation has to
do is it has to go to the render
buffer behind your layer and sample
the pixels from that in addition
to the pixels from your layer and
smooth those against each other.
Now we already know that if you
just have an image with a line
in it and you rotate that image,
the line isn't really jaggy.
The reason for that is that
Core Animation can sample just the
pixels in the image of the layer
itself when rotating and figuring out
the color value of that rotated pixel.
So we're going to draw a transparent
border around our image so that
when we sample at the edge,
we get some of that transparent
border without having to go
all the way to the background.
So this is our main view controller.
And here's where we
create our image views.
This is both the top image view,
the large one,
and the bottom ones in the scroll view.
So I'm just going to drag
a little code in here.
We're creating a new UI image on
the fly using the froggy image,
but putting a one-pixel
transparent border around it.
We do that with the UIGraphics functions
that you may not have seen before,
but which Mathieu used for
the mask in the last demo.
UIGraphicsBeginImageContext creates
a new Core Graphics bitmap context.
All it takes in this
particular form is a size,
which is the original image size with
two pixels extra in each dimension.
This is effectively what
UIKit is doing for you,
and I think it's important
to remember this.
When you implement DrawRect,
we're just going to set
up a context for you,
call DrawRect,
take the image out of that context,
and set it as the contents of the layer.
Here we're sort of doing it up front,
and we're going to let UIImageView take
care of the actual rendering
of that image from here on out.
So we draw our froggy
into our larger image.
We get the image out of the context.
[Transcript missing]
So now I'm going to go ahead
and launch my Froggy app again.
And I'm proud to show you-- oh, well,
there's still a lot of yellow.
There's still an off-screen rendering
pass being used on all those images.
And I'm going to tell you about
why that isn't just a moment.
There's one more thing that we
could do for this edge antelias-ing.
Because we're running
a little low on time,
I'm going to leave as an
exercise to the reader.
But I'm just going to talk
you through it really quick.
You may have noticed that before we
were just using UIImageImageNamed
to refer to these froggies.
And so the image being used on
the bottom and the image being
used on the top was the same data.
And you might ask, well,
why are we creating this new larger
image with the transparent border twice?
Now we're using double the pixel data.
And you'd be right.
So you could share that
data between the two images.
But there's an issue with doing that too.
If you look at the
froggies on the bottom,
you'll note that--
they have jagged edges.
And I just promised you that this
method would give you sort of smooth
edges without performance costs.
So why do they have jaggy edges?
Well, it's the same image data.
You have a really big frog image.
Maybe it's 500 pixels wide.
And you've drawn a one
pixel border around it.
And then you've asked Core Animation to
scale that image down.
Well, it's also going to
scale down your border.
So now your one pixel transparent
border is maybe like a tenth
of a pixel transparent border.
And when you go to smooth,
you don't have so much of that extra
fudge data to work with anymore.
And so as an exercise for you all,
if you want to use this in your app,
you have to be careful about using that
transparent border at the actual size of
the contents you're going to care about.
So let's get rid of the
last bit of wash here.
And that last bit of wash
comes from the shadows.
And Josh was telling you that
the shadows are really expensive.
They have to do an extra
off-screen rendering pass.
And that's just because if
there was a hole in the image,
we wouldn't want to draw a
shadow filling that entire hole.
We would just want to draw shadows
under the edge of the hole,
very artfully and gracefully.
And that's expensive.
That requires an off-screen
rendering pass for Core Animation to
figure out where the holes are.
But it's often really helpful in
optimization of your apps to tell
the system about the assumptions and
constraints of your application that
it doesn't necessarily know about.
In this case,
our frog images are all rectilinear,
and they're all opaque.
And the system doesn't know that.
but we can tell it about
that assumption and get some
improvement in our performance.
One thing to keep in mind is you
may have noticed that the top frog
image changed size when we rotated.
And so we don't have a
constant size shadow.
Our shadow is going to be one size in
portrait and another size in landscape.
And so we can't do it, this optimization,
when we create the image view.
We have to do it when we
lay the image view out.
This is a method that gets
called both when we create the
image views and when we rotate.
And I'm just going to drop
some more magic code in here.
And there's two parts to it.
Let me address this first.
We're going to use this shadow
path property of ca_layer.
And with that property,
we can tell Core Animation,
very specifically,
this is the shape of the contents.
This is where I want
you to draw the shadow,
and it's very fast.
We do that with just a Bezier path.
Our content is rectilinear,
and so we create a
rectangular Bezier path.
We could use this for
more complicated content,
too.
You may notice the popovers
in iOS are really fast,
and they still have shadows.
Part of the only reason they are
really fast is that we were able to
create a UI Bezier path which describes
the shape of the popovers outline.
You know, it's a rounded rect that is
unioned with the little arrow
for the popovers pointer.
And so you aren't limited
to really simple shapes.
You can get kind of complex.
The one other thing I want to draw your
attention to-- we're running out of time,
so I may have to explain this a
little faster than I would like.
is the fact that
ShadowPath is a property
on Core Animation layers,
and UIKit doesn't know about it.
UIKit normally does a fair amount of
work to help you with implicit animations
using this Begin Animations API.
Those details are not really
necessary for you to understand,
but one thing that you should
understand is that if you go changing
properties in Core Animation which
don't have equivalents in UIKit,
you're not going to get the
lovely automatic animation
behavior that you're used to.
Here we have to do it ourselves.
It's not so hard.
We just use this
CA Basic Animation class,
and we tell it what we're changing,
where we're changing it from,
and what we're setting it to,
and we give it a duration to animate.
We're going to use the same
duration which is passed to us here,
which was being used for the
rotation that's causing the
size change in the first place.
And it's important that we animate
this because when we change
from portrait to landscape,
we want our shadow to
animate size as well,
just as it was doing before.
And we need it to animate at the
same speed so that the image doesn't
change size faster than the shadow,
which would look very strange.
So once we've created
this CA Basic Animation,
we just add it to our layer.
And then you'll see if we switch
back to this app one last time,
hooray, hurrah,
all of the yellow is gone.
And look how fast that rotation is.
All right.
Thanks, Andy.
Sorry for the quick
run-through there at the end.
If you have more information,
Bill Dudney is our evangelist.
There's another session right after this,
Core Animation Essentials,
to talk more about Core Animation.
Bill will be giving the practical
drawing in iOS later today.